# PANORAMIC - Simplifying Data Ingestion, Transformation, And Delivery

Panoramic is a world leader in providing analytics to communications firms and media service providers. It helps marketers use consumer data to hone their creative strategies. Panoramic's data scientists and marketing analysts build customized data platforms that enable marketers to visualize consumer data for analysis, benchmarking, internal collaboration, and more. The company has built its business around ingesting and modeling marketing data as a foundation for generating meaningful insights.

Panoramic constantly collects, aggregates, and manages semistructured data from marketing and advertising platforms such as Facebook, Google Ads, Twitter, Amazon, and Bing. The data engineering process is complicated by the fact that the APIs and data schemas from these platforms are constantly changing. These shifting requirements forced Panoramic's data engineers to spend many hours each week adjusting the schemas, modifying APIs, and loading data into the marketing intelligence platform.

To simplify data ingestion and transformation activities, Panoramic adopted a cloud data platform that includes a native data-ingestion process for storing and managing semi-structured JSON data. The new platform gives Panoramic an easier way to handle the flexible schemas associated with JSON documents, optimizing data ingestion, simplifying data sharing, and facilitating workflow automation. The platform saves many hours and thousands of dollars formerly spent managing APIs, data schema, and ETL procedures.

Today, Panoramic's data engineers can focus on delivering value, rather than on working with tedious data interfaces. And because the platform allows for secure data sharing without copying or duplicating data, it's easy to extend these robust data sets to customers.
